JUDY WOODRUFF: And
now a story about the
founding of our nation.
A distant ancestor of Rohulamin
Quander was enslaved at George
Washington's Mount Vernon
estate in Virginia.
Quander is now a tour guide
there, where he offers a unique
perspective on the contributions
of African-Americans to
our country's history.
This story was filmed, edited
and produced by middle and
high school students who are
part of the "NewsHour"'s
Student Reporting Labs program.
ROHULAMIN QUANDER, Family
Historian: The past always
has an impact on the future.
Those who do not know
their past are kind of
destined to repeat it.
We have that program every year.
I have been coming
here all my life.
I remember when I was
like about 12 years old.
But I didn't fully understand
or appreciate the family's
longstanding connection.
We're going to go up to the
exhibit, Lives Bound Together:
Slavery at George Washington's
Mount Vernon.
I am a licensed tour guide
in the District of Columbia,
and I come and I bring groups
all over the metropolitan
Washington, D.C.,
including to George
Washington's Mount Vernon,
which the Quander family
has a longstanding
historical connection with.
SUSAN SCHOELWER, Co-Curator,
Mount Vernon: Nancy Carter
was a young girl, really, who
was 11 years old in 1799
when George Washington
made provisions in his
will to free his slaves.
Her mother, Suckey Bay was her
name, was an enslaved woman who
lived on one of Washington's
five farms and was a field hand.
So when Washington
freed his slaves, then
Nancy Carter was free.
She later married Charles
Quander, who was a member
of the Quander family.
And so there are many
descendants that come
down from that and are
part of the large Quander
family, which, as you
know, is one of the
oldest, if not the oldest,
documented African-American
family in the country.
ROHULAMIN QUANDER: The
family history goes back
into Maryland in the 1600s.
We hear about the Hamiltons and
the Madisons and the Jeffersons.
Well, do we hear about the
enslaved people who made sure
the crops were in, who made
sure the fishing was
proper, who made sure
the distillery was run?
They were the ones who were
the backbone, so that George
Washington could go off and
become the father of our nation.
SUSAN SCHOELWER: You
really can't understand
George Washington's life
without understanding
the lives of the people whose
lives were intertwined with his,
whose work supported his estate.
ROHULAMIN QUANDER: I
try to instill into
everyone the importance of
understanding where we as
Americans came from.
I often say this is not a
black history tour; this is
an American history tour.
WOMAN: I think, for me, it's
really -- it gives me a sense
of history to share with
my kids, and it's also really
neat to be able to participate
in this tour with Mr. Quander,
as he has relatives and
his ancestry line is
here at Mount Vernon.
SUSAN SCHOELWER: It's also, I
think, important to honor the
lives and the contributions of
the people who were enslaved
here and elsewhere whose stories
have not been told, have perhaps
not been remembered, have
not been appreciated.
ROHULAMIN QUANDER: We
are a bridge from the
past to the present.
And we have a responsibility
of upholding the Quander
name and lifting others as we
climb.
And it's important for
people to understand that
we have earned our rights.
We have built, literally
physically built Mount Vernon,
built the United States Capitol,
built the White House, along
with other people, of course.
But we need people in the
African-American diaspora to
understand that we have always
been a part of what
constitutes America.